Jerry Michalski: This is the OGM Open Global Mind Weekly Call for Thursday, October 30th.
Jerry Michalski: 2025…
Jerry Michalski: Did I get the year right? Yep. How did we get… I don't know how we got into 2025 already, it's a quarter of the century.
Jerry Michalski: It's happening fast. It's going by real quick.
Jerry Michalski: We were,
Jerry Michalski: Just commenting on marsupials. So, how clever, how clever the program is that you're born a little worm, you go out, you attach yourself to a nutrition, and then grow up.
Jerry Michalski: Has anybody been, like, up close and personal with a kangaroo or a wallaby that has a Joey in its pouch? Like, a pretty grown Joey with little legs sticking out of the pouch?
Jerry Michalski: it's like it's carrying a nearly, nearly full-grown kangaroo in there. And the Joey… the joey just, like, dives in, does, like, a little cannonball in, and its feet are completely sticking out. You're like, wow, that looks uncomfortable.
Mike Nelson: for both parties.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, yeah, well, Joy loves it.
Jerry Michalski: And April and I got to feed wallabies and ruse, when we were at a little wild park in Australia, and they are tame and delight… they're cool.
Jerry Michalski: They were very sweet.
Jerry Michalski: Welcome, everybody. Eric, nice to see you.
Jerry Michalski: Even though you're on a call right now. We have as our topic
Jerry Michalski: How to render crony capitalism obsolete.
Jerry Michalski: which, mike, was it your thought last week?
Mike Nelson: Well, I was talking about crony capitalism. We did a lot of wordsmithing and got lots of good ideas on which piece of this to dive into, but…
Mike Nelson: For my money, crony capitalism and disinformation
Mike Nelson: are two of the drivers of all the bad things that are going on in the world right now. Whether it's wars, or Trump, or…
Mike Nelson: Repression of human rights in country after country. It's just…
Mike Nelson: That's what you gotta do if you want to maintain that network of dark money and, illegal activity.
Jerry Michalski: Was there no crony capitalism under progressives?
Mike Nelson: Oh, no, I think, I mean, Maduro considers himself, you know, a leftist.
Jerry Michalski: I would think that the MAGA critique of the left is that it was crony capitalism.
Mike Nelson: Well, coming.
Jerry Michalski: of the progressive American left.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, we got two… we got at least two different themes here. We got one is capitalism, and one is cronyism, and they… and maybe you want to take socialism in the mix, too, and combine them in various ways.
Jerry Michalski: Perhaps. Well, I'm.
Mike Nelson: Well, I think crony socialism is a form of crony capitalism, because it's all about the capital. Follow the money.
Mike Nelson: I mean, it's socialism in air quotes.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah.
Mike Nelson: I mean, Marxism never got a chance.
Jerry Michalski: But certainly what's happening in Russia, for example.
Jerry Michalski: is crony commune capitalism, or something like that? Because, the Sloviki is the name for…
Jerry Michalski: Putin's former buddies from the FSB and the KGB and all those things, who basically went out and own a lot of the… when they privatized all the enterprises, a lot of those people went out to run those enterprises. And they scratch each other's backs, and I think…
Jerry Michalski: I think one of the reasons Putin has such control over Russia still, even though he's eaten more than 1.25…
Jerry Michalski: plus million Russians dead in this conflict is one of the estimates.
Jerry Michalski: which is astonishing to me. They only lost, like, 20,000 people in Afghanistan after 10 years, and they left. So the numbers are completely staggering to me, that that many Russians can have died, and this is still a thing.
Jerry Michalski: But I think the Siloviki are a reason why he can stay in power.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Jerry, why would you remotely call that communist?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: There doesn't seem to be anything communist about it anymore since the fall.
Jerry Michalski: I… yes, except there's, like, this, it's like, there's a German term, Ostalgi, which is nostalgia for the old Ost regime, the former East Germany. It seems like Putin is trying to regrow the former Soviet Union.
Jerry Michalski: and happen… and using capitalism as a handy mechanism to do it, even though it's not that capitalist or democratic or anything anymore, right? So I don't know what to call… it's a kleptocracy, I guess. It's…
Jerry Michalski: doesn't fall neatly into any category. So it's not communism anymore, but it feels like there's some weird mutt mix of stuff.
Mike Nelson: Just to correct a statistic, Jerry, the 1.2 million number is casualties, not.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, I thought it was dead.
Jerry Michalski: There's an estimate that's been growing ever since the war started, and it just… it crossed a million a while ago, and it may be a Ukraine-biased estimate, but it's not casualties, it's debt.
Mike Nelson: No, it's CSIS…
Mike Nelson: indicates that it was up to a quarter of a million people dead, total casualties. Well, and that… this was a couple months ago, but…
Jerry Michalski: Okay?
Mike Nelson: Yeah, it is. But a quarter of a million dead, I mean, that's… I mean, that's incredible.
Jerry Michalski: Still huge. Yeah, yeah.
Mike Nelson: And they have half the population of the U.S.
Mike Nelson: Yeah, that was as of June in the Guardian.
Jerry Michalski: So our topic is crony capitalism, and we don't need to… I dragged this into Putin land because I was trying to figure out, so what is this thing? You know, how to… that seems to be a version of crony capitalism.
Mike Nelson: The most extreme version, I would say, other than maybe North Korea and, and I guess…
Jerry Michalski: the North.
Mike Nelson: Assad's Syria.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah, but I don't think North Korea would claim to be capitalist, where Russia would claim to be capitalist now, right? So it is, I think, the most extreme version. And I wanted to bring into the conversation pretty quickly, people like Lawrence Lessig.
Jerry Michalski: And his Root Strikers efforts. Lawrence has,
Jerry Michalski: Lawrence has not had much success over the years, but he's been fighting the noble fight against exactly these kinds of things for years. He lost Eldred versus Reno way back in the day, which was a copyright
Jerry Michalski: case that went to the Supreme Court that was a terrible loss. I really regret that that happened.
Jerry Michalski: Copyright just.
Mike Nelson: The world would have been different.
Jerry Michalski: for that.
Mike Nelson: Yeah, world would have been different, exactly. But even while he was doing that, I was convincing him that that's not gonna… not gonna work. I mean, the corruption caused by the copyright industry…
Mike Nelson: is what's driving the politics of copyright and the policy. And it is, it's blatant corruption. I mean, it's really, really bad how, I mean, these…
Mike Nelson: Senators and congressmen are promised great jobs when they leave, and they get, you know, they end up, you know, million-dollar-a-year jobs running trade associations for RIAA and Motion Picture Association of America.
Mike Nelson: but also just, I mean, it's… it's incredible how they…
Mike Nelson: invite almost every White House staffer to
Mike Nelson: movies at their special, exclusive preview theater five blocks from the White House, and it's just… it's not… it's not that they're just focusing on the people who make the policy, they're… they're blanketing the… so that everybody thinks the movie industry is the most important industry in America.
Jerry Michalski: So I'm curious, let's pause what we've said so far, and let's get a little read of the room. Under the topic of crony capitalism, what paths would anybody like to take into the topic?
Jerry Michalski: Le… let's not assume away. Go ahead, John.
* John Kelly: Alright, so this is… this is, I will admit, big. I mean, so…
Jerry Michalski: Never go for big. What do you do?
* John Kelly: Indulgence.
* John Kelly: So that,
* John Kelly: You know, of course, there's the transaction, economic transactions, and all the things that go with that. You know, measurement, precision,
* John Kelly: gross ignoring of important non-monetary values, et cetera, et cetera. So there's a whole world over here of economics, alright?
* John Kelly: Then there's this world over here of, democracy, policy.
* John Kelly: And there's this attempt to, you know.
* John Kelly: keep the two separate. There's this idea that, well, people should be able to express their intentions, and those intentions should have consequences, and that should work, you know? And it's very fragile, and we all know how it breaks down.
* John Kelly: Then there's this weird kind of middle territory that I'm gonna talk about, and it's,
* John Kelly: it has different… there are different models here. One… one model is, you know, reputational economies.
* John Kelly: Where people have influence, That's a function of their reputation.
* John Kelly: And there's, of course, we've seen the most, you know.
* John Kelly: Problematic and obscene versions of this, in terms of the social media-like
* John Kelly: Button, their number of followers, influencers, all that kind of stuff.
* John Kelly: But I just want to kind of put that on the table, put it over there, and say, okay.
* John Kelly: what would it look like if we had a diff… is there something missing? Is there something in the space here that's missing, that if we could make it, it would…
* John Kelly: solve the crony capitalism problem and the disinformation problem. And the idea I'm thinking of is something like…
* John Kelly: a, everybody has… and not everybody has a vote, everybody has influence.
* John Kelly: And some people do have more influence than others, but it's bounded.
* John Kelly: you cannot be taken down to zero influence, and you cannot have more influence than some amount, you know? And, how do we get influence? Well, in an ideal world, you would actually earn…
* John Kelly: your social capital, not the way the Chinese do it, by saying, oh, well, you didn't say anything bad about… and you didn't jaywalk, but actually by doing things that contribute to the community.
* John Kelly: And… and how would we keep track of this? Well, that's a… there's a whole set of messy issues here. I think… I think if it's in the hands of the government, no, you know, or the hands of a corporation. I think it has to be a kind of a quasi-public entity.
* John Kelly: And, anyhow, this, this thing, this, this reputational economy can periodically
* John Kelly: be fired at certain social problems. The way… kind of the way a…
* John Kelly: Civic Assembly does now. You know, we isolate an issue, we isolate some people, we say, you know, you've been selected.
* John Kelly: You come out with a position on this. By the way, try to get a position that has
* John Kelly: supermajority acceptance within your group, and then it'll have a chance in the regular system. So, I mean, this is a cluster of characteristics, and I admit that it's very loose and very messy, but I'm wondering if there is something
* John Kelly: in the way of a reputational economy that's not controlled by the government, it's not controlled by corporations, it has limits, top and bottom. There's a degree of influence below which you cannot be lowered, nor above which you cannot attain.
* John Kelly: And that does have some input to something like what we would call an election, but not with the binary decisiveness of our current elections, more like a tuning, more like a, okay, it's October, and we're now gonna tune, and, you know, guess what?
* John Kelly: this thing you're trying to do, it's not… you know, you should do something else, you know. It's some kind of way of nudging the public sphere with the reputational economy.
* John Kelly: Very messy idea, I admit.
Jerry Michalski: That's okay. John, have you looked at liquid democracy? I have, yeah. I have, yeah. Is there an overlap there, or are you talking about something.
* John Kelly: Yeah, yeah, there is an overlap, yeah, and there's the,
* John Kelly: I'm not recalling whether the version that I looked at had the reputational assignment. In other words, like, you pick somebody who has your vote on… in certain areas. Is that also part of Liquid, or is that something else?
Jerry Michalski: I think… I think you kind of proxy… you proxy your vote, or at least you sort of join people whose opinions you agree with.
* John Kelly: Yup.
Jerry Michalski: And that sort of moves, and then you can see how many people are
Jerry Michalski: are going around, the different opinions. Go ahead, Eric.
Erik Willekens: Correct, correct, I used to be… I used to be in a private party that was actually building on, literally, the software system that would do this, yeah.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks. So, go ahead, John.
* John Kelly: Okay, so just, you know, I mean, I know that it's very messy raw material, but it's just raw material from which to potentially build something that is in between, civic elections and economic transactions.
* John Kelly: But then hesitation.
Jerry Michalski: Sorry.
Jerry Michalski: I wish our friend David Bavill were on this call, because he did a lot of work in liquid democracy early on, is quite familiar with it.
Jerry Michalski: Et cetera, et cetera.
* John Kelly: Yup.
Jerry Michalski: I also wish Grace were here, because according to Kalia, a lot of the work that she and Grace and others are doing with identity systems and other kinds of things, I think, move toward what you're talking about, John?
Jerry Michalski: It would be interesting to know.
Jerry Michalski: Gil, please.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, thanks. Well, let's,
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Let's invite Grace and Kalia and other folks back for a specific call focused on that, perhaps. John, what you say is messy and fascinating at the same time. I can't imagine how you think about something that's not controlled by government or corporations, since those control each other.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And I'm not sure where cancel culture fits into the scheme that you're sketching, but all that aside, I wanted to respond to Jerry's question about the framing.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I think we need to look at,
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: If we're looking at crony capitalism and these phenomena, we have to consider what of these arise out of capitalism, and what of these arise out of cronyism, which is maybe an innate human quality in human cultures, or maybe not.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But where do we see that, and where do we not see that?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: So, I want to tease those apart, if we're going to look at these, because I think each of them offers a very rich mess, if you will. And just by way of housekeeping, I'm going to switch to phone at the half hour, and I'll go off the call at the top of the hour, got a doctor's appointment, but I'll stay with as long as I can, and thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Awesome. Did you want to dive into the separation you're looking for more?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I don't know… well, I don't have anything formulated on that, but I think what the phenomenon that we're talking about arises out of both of those.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And so I guess I… yeah, I guess where I go is the question that I… that I…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Pardon me.
Jerry Michalski: the question I ended with, which is.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: To what degree is cronyism a, a, you know,
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: common, if not universal, aspect of human affairs, or the other side of that question is, where do we not see cronyism arising, and what sorts of societies and cultures do we not see cronyism as a phenomenon? So maybe we can kind of, you know, back out of the question into looking at some of the fundamental roots of it.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And then we can get to, you know, does capitalism or modern capitalism or American capitalism give rise to more of that, or what are the phenomena that have more cronyism arise or not within the variety of capitalist societies that we have currently on the planet?
Jerry Michalski: So, maybe we need to redefine our definitions a little bit, too.
Jerry Michalski: It's cronyism when Significant chunks of business or control or power are given to our
Jerry Michalski: buddies and allies. Is that the definition of cronyism? Meaning, we always try to vote for people we like, etc. I mean, human relations are all about who you trust and who you're gonna, you know, bring in to do stuff. The question is, do they get the rewards?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: We do favors for our friends.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: You know, we bend rules and protocols and so forth for people that we like.
Jerry Michalski: So we used to have the spoils system. In this country, the spoil system was, to the victor belong the spoils, is the saying. And if you won the election, you got to put your people in everywhere. And then we created legislation to stop that.
Mike Nelson: We're mixing a lot of things together.
Jerry Michalski: Yes.
Mike Nelson: And they're all interrelated, which is why we have to discuss the whole picture. But you just pointed out that they're…
Mike Nelson: There's cronyism in government, and then there's cronyism in the marketplace. And in both cases, the test of whether you have crony capitalism is whether friendships
Mike Nelson: are more important.
Mike Nelson: and alliances.
Mike Nelson: Are more important and have more impact than market forces or good policy.
Mike Nelson: And it's hard to draw that line, but that's kind of the test that I use when I say, oh, well, that country is characterized by crony capitalism. They're clearly doing bad policy that favors a few people.
Mike Nelson: And generates a lot of profit for them that they have
Mike Nelson: No right to have in a fair free market.
Mike Nelson: So the two are related. You can almost think of it as a circle, where
Mike Nelson: The policy is decided. That allows and enables projects. Projects enable profits.
Mike Nelson: For the select few.
Mike Nelson: That then influences the policy all over again.
Mike Nelson: So the money is changing hands as it goes from the government.
Mike Nelson: To the, to the people who are implementing these projects, which…
Mike Nelson: because they often have a monopoly, or have some other type… way to control competition, they get the huge profits, and then they buy the legislature and hire the prime minister's son. I mean, it's just… it's… it's an ever-ending circle.
Mike Nelson: And in a lot of countries.
Mike Nelson: For 200 years, they had that circle, and there was a understanding that there was a, you know, a 10% cut.
Mike Nelson: There were these facilitators, and, you know, the nephew of so-and-so, and they got a 10% of the cut, and yet things worked
Mike Nelson: After a fashion, and they… and things got built, and…
Mike Nelson: I mean, New York City, in the worst of the Boss Tweed days, managed to build quite the infrastructure. Now.
Mike Nelson: they had some advantages. There was all this new technology, and there was this flood of immigrants coming in. So even if they were taking 10 or 20%, they had a lot left over to do good things. It was crony capitalism, because it was obviously not
Mike Nelson: Being run to the benefit of all, and money was being diverted that could have been spent in much wiser ways.
Mike Nelson: But I think this point of how do we define it is critically important.
Mike Nelson: And, and… I love John's idea, which is…
Mike Nelson: You know, the problem is not getting rid of the cronies.
Mike Nelson: The problem is enabling all the rest of us to have some power, too.
Mike Nelson: And that's what they thought they were doing in Russia. All these Western economists came in and said, okay, well, we're gonna give
Mike Nelson: All these state enterprises…
Mike Nelson: In the form of shares to Russian citizens. Everybody was gonna have their chunk of this nickel mine and that oil field.
Mike Nelson: And somehow it never… Never worked that way. It wasn't decentralized.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Well, Mike, it did work that way.
Jerry Michalski: Well, can we just go according to order? Could you put your hand down? Because you spoke a little earlier.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, sure.
Mike Nelson: Well, I would like to hear… if he has a one-sentence intervention, I mean, I think he's right. I mean, the money… the shares were allocated, and then somehow…
Mike Nelson: Somebody went and, you know, reallocated them.
Jerry Michalski: Go ahead, Gil, if you want to… if it's.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: I will, and I'm a little confused, Jerry, because Eric stepped in with a comment before, and that was okay, so I'm not sure what the rule set is on…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Short comments, but…
Jerry Michalski: Yes. Eric looked like he was trying to explain the thing that happened right then, and I saw him sort of… Yes.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, that's what I was trying to do.
Mike Nelson: Two-finger rule, yeah.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Okay, oh, two fingers? Okay, got it. Two fingers. My understanding, Mike, is that the shares were allocated, and they were very quickly scooped up by the folks that Jerry called that clever name before.
Jerry Michalski: Silver King.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: the Silova case, so, you know, they went out to the regular people and said, you have these shares that might be worth something someday, but I'm gonna give you a bottle of vodka today. And, like, vom! All of a sudden, all of a sudden, like, in very short order, because there was no protections against that as part of the scheme, the whole thing was consolidated.
Jerry Michalski: You know what they say, a bottle of vodka in the hand is sort of two in the bush.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: There you go.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: stunningly fast, and I'm sure somebody has unpacked that story, it's a fascinating.
Mike Nelson: I would like to see it, I have not…
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: There was the potential there for something very, very different than we've ever seen before in the world, and it was just killed, like that.
Mike Nelson: Yep, yep, yep. Worker ownership of the entire economy. Okay, thank you very much.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you all.
Alex Kladitis: Okay.
Jerry Michalski: Turn the attention for later. One of the things I don't like about Hernando de Soto's, economic theories that we should give people property… we should give very poor people property rights, is that they rapidly get expropriated of those property rights and then have nothing at all.
Jerry Michalski: So, it's weird. How do we protect people and ownership? How do we keep distributed ownership distributed? That's a really interesting question. If it's about a certificate or money, then it's purchasable from you, and then you're done. You don't get that participation anymore, so…
Jerry Michalski: Maybe we come back to that a little bit. I want to go to Stacy, who's been really patient, and actually…
Jerry Michalski: Alex, I think, was in line earlier and fell out, so let's… I was, and I was waiting, but my hand went down for some reason, so… I think… Can I come in now?
Jerry Michalski: I think if we make a little bit of noise on our mics, sometimes the hand automatically goes down, because it thinks we're speaking. So let's do Alex, then Stacey.
Alex Kladitis: Right, thank you. First of all, on the Russia thing.
Alex Kladitis: I have heard quite a bit about it. One of the elements was actually, as you say, the stuff was given to the people.
Alex Kladitis: But there were a lot of people who didn't have one idea from another what the hell they were given.
Alex Kladitis: And there was a lot of mob rule, and they literally went and…
Alex Kladitis: they would go to the old people, primarily, and say, you either sign over these things to us, or you die, and generally, they killed them anyway.
Alex Kladitis: The number was hundreds of thousands to millions of people were extorted
Alex Kladitis: and a lot of them killed, literally, by the mobs. It was just a whole mob rule type situation. There's a whole load of work being done on that. Anyway, not now. Right, so on this issue.
Alex Kladitis: Yes, we're right to be separating crony… sorry, we're saying crony capitalism because our system is capitalist. But actually, I believe cronyism is… is independent of any political system. One's a political system, one's a system of self-interest.
Alex Kladitis: Now, the… the only way I think, and I'm not…
Alex Kladitis: I'll say it, but I know it's impractical at the moment.
Alex Kladitis: is… The power that the crony… Cronism has.
Alex Kladitis: Is… most of the time, is it secrecy, or by the time it comes out, a lot of time has gone past?
Alex Kladitis: So, one of the things you should do is, to me, force the government and everyone
Alex Kladitis: to actually… if you have a chat with a government minister, you produce a document that says, within hours, this is what we spoke about, this is the recording, this is what we said. So, ultimate transparency is what will
Alex Kladitis: At least make people aware that something's in the offing, because a lot of it is hidden behind the scenes, nobody ever hears about it, or if they do, it's too late.
Alex Kladitis: Now.
Alex Kladitis: The things that come out against it, those guys will come up and say, one is commercial confidentiality.
Alex Kladitis: Personally, I think chronic capitalism has become such a problem that that is irrelevant to me anymore.
Alex Kladitis: they use commercial confidentiality for anything. They'll have a great big chat about how they're gonna divvy up, scratch each other's back, or whatever, and they'll put one number, one dollar a month, and say, that's commercial confidentiality. It isn't, but that's how they use it. The other one is, oh, it's…
Alex Kladitis: Secret Service stuff, you cannot say anything. My ultimate thing would be…
Alex Kladitis: If everybody's… every penny they make, It's up on a blockchain.
Alex Kladitis: For anyone to look at and question, why did you make that amount of money?
Alex Kladitis: It's not comfortable.
Alex Kladitis: But at least we'd have a hell of a lot of information, and be able to say, why did this guy get this contract and made a few million out of the side there, when the contract had nothing to do with it?
Alex Kladitis: So, it's… is it practical? Could it ever happen?
Alex Kladitis: I don't know, because these guys are pretty good at covering the tracks Under the name of secrecy.
Alex Kladitis: So, but the blockchain couldn't give you a lot of transparency.
Alex Kladitis: Even if you don't go down the commercial route, if every government, senator, whatever, minister, every officer, every time you spoke to someone.
Alex Kladitis: You had to say what you spoke about, and here's the recording or the notes of it.
Alex Kladitis: Out in the open. Within seconds.
Alex Kladitis: Then, I think, a lot less would happen.
Alex Kladitis: But… Who am I to say that?
Alex Kladitis: I don't think it'll happen.
Jerry Michalski: A couple items there. The government of Estonia, when they got their country back, went all electronic. They were like, screw paper, and we're gonna just go electronic, and they did a bunch of very innovative things. They had a platform for a while, I didn't have time right now to check whether it's still active and going, but called X-Road.
Jerry Michalski: Slash Road.
Jerry Michalski: Which, they were actually starting to sell to other countries as a platform for government. And I think, I think, I'd love to fact-check this, I think when they started, every elected official had to post their calendar online.
Jerry Michalski: And then my friend, Andrew Roche was trying to run for elected office in Manhattan years ago, and he and Mikha Sifri were trying to get… one of their agenda items was, we just want people to post their calendars. We want elected officials to post who they're meeting with.
Jerry Michalski: That's it. Who they're meet… and could not get that through.
Jerry Michalski: could not get open calendaring through as a small issue in an election cycle, blah blah blah blah, because
Jerry Michalski: You know, who you meet with is one of the things. When…
Jerry Michalski: Oh, God, not Scalia. When,
Jerry Michalski: Clarence Thomas was being, was being, outed for receiving a lot of gifts and things like that.
Jerry Michalski: He was going to these retreats.
Jerry Michalski: the retreats, it's not the money that matters in the fancy jet, it's the fact that those are places where people get to corner you and have conversations with you. It's the conversations that matter, not so much the money and the other goodies.
Jerry Michalski: So all these things are, are…
Jerry Michalski: it's possible to legislate, it's just that you can't get people to do it. Now, it could be that humans in America and other countries are really ready for a radically more transparent government, and that that would be part of a platform offer for a new party coming in. I would like that.
Jerry Michalski: I think that'd be really pretty cool.
Jerry Michalski: We're gonna get rid of this kind of stuff and do it in this other kind of way.
Jerry Michalski: Stacy, thank you for your patience.
Jerry Michalski: The floor is yours.
Stacey Druss: I wanted to go back and speak to the human part of the question.
Stacey Druss: from the small and local. So…
Stacey Druss: When we go to our friends, it's usually because we're looking for a bargain. When I became president of a condo association, we had a rule in place that if you lived in the building, you couldn't do work in the building.
Stacey Druss: Well, we had a contractor living in our building who became my vice president, and I changed that role. He was allowed to do the work in the building, but we got the family discount, and we showed
Stacey Druss: All of his… all of the materials that he bought, we got his contractor's discount. We showed that.
Stacey Druss: the people in the building already trusted me. I had given them a lot of reason to trust me. Everything was there. We saved a lot of money by using him, and he got the benefit of getting the work. It was his home. It was our home. There was, a mental thing going on where we all belonged
Stacey Druss: to the community. When I look at what's happening in New York City.
Stacey Druss: and I'm involved in discussions with Mondami, and I have people saying all these horrible things, and, you know, this is socialism, blah blah blah, and I point out to them that this man has 90,000 community members working together, and they will bring up theft, and I say, well.
Stacey Druss: when… I mean, this sounds kind of silly, but when you feel like something belongs to you and your community, even if you're going to steal, you usually steal from outside your community.
Stacey Druss: There's… there's just…
Stacey Druss: there's a lot of human nature that I do think needs to be considered.
Stacey Druss: And,
Stacey Druss: I just want to say that I've had many conversations with many people, and there's only two sectors. One would be the entertainment industry, and the other would be in, like, finance, where repeatedly, good people have said things that go like this.
Stacey Druss: Well, you gotta work with bad people if you're gonna make it in this business. And I always want to throw up.
Stacey Druss: Now, it used to be that you didn't hear that in government, and that was because they were afraid they'd be outed.
Stacey Druss: People held secrets over you. Now it doesn't matter. Secrets don't matter. There is no shame. You don't have to worry about being outed, because it's fake news. It doesn't matter. Nobody believes anything.
Stacey Druss: So, I think transparency has to be a big part of everything, but I also think, like, when…
Stacey Druss: Oh, John is still here. When John was talking, I always think of the jury system.
Stacey Druss: And I like the idea of juries, but I wish they were juries in other locations, where they have no ties at all.
Stacey Druss: You know, I think that kind of…
Stacey Druss: disconnect, but connect, could be, like, a good thing. I don't know if that makes any sense, but I… I think that, by nature, we want to be surrounded around people we want to be surrounded by, and that part's a good thing, which is…
Stacey Druss: Why we give business to those around us, but when it becomes bad is when it's us against them, and there is no
Stacey Druss: Diversity, equity, and inclusion.
Stacey Druss: Over.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, Stacy.
Jerry Michalski: Conflicts of interest, all those kinds of things are really hard to untangle and get right.
Jerry Michalski: And it's… it's part of… it's part of…
Jerry Michalski: how we construct society in different ways, right? And different societies have different things. Gil asked earlier in the chat, why only Estonia? Estonia had this weird moment, Gil.
Jerry Michalski: Where… where they just had a chance to reinvent things. Iceland had a moment where they reinvented their constitution, and then the Parliament failed to ratify it. So they did a great, great job.
Jerry Michalski: Rethinking a very old Danish constitution that they inherited that they didn't like.
Jerry Michalski: And then, it didn't make… it didn't survive the political process, which is, to my mind.
Jerry Michalski: stupid. I mean, if you've done some great work that's unifying people, like, go for it.
Alex Kladitis: Well, that's the reason, Jerry, sorry, yeah, Gerry, because the crony capitalists, or one of the cronyists.
Alex Kladitis: got to them, because they didn't want that to go through, in both cases.
Jerry Michalski: Yep.
Jerry Michalski: Eric posts in the chat that Denmark is seen as one of the lowest perceived public sector corruption… corrupt companies… countries… company, that's very funny.
Jerry Michalski: And here are some reasons. There's, eric, are you familiar with the folk school system in Northern Europe? The Folkschorn?
Jerry Michalski: forkscolon.
Jerry Michalski: Back in… I'll look it up, but there was a system of schools, and it turns out that in most Nordic countries, a third of the population went to these schools.
Jerry Michalski: And these schools were really, really good about civic participation, that they kind of turned out really good citizens. And it's possible that the governments we have now in Northern European social democracies
Jerry Michalski: are good and less corrupt and more trusted by their citizens because of things like that. I don't know.
Jerry Michalski: flinging around theories here. Alex, please.
Alex Kladitis: I… Sorry, can I just say, comment on that, Eric's, ChatGPT point?
Alex Kladitis: Okay, so the way it's phrased is lowest amount of perceived public sector corruption in the world. Let's assume it's not ChatGPT making it misnoming, or whatever, mis texting or whatever, but
Alex Kladitis: if everybody else is 100%, where is Denmark? Because it says… so, first it says it's lowest perceived, and then why is Denmark scene so clean? Well, I don't think you can infer one from the other, because
Alex Kladitis: if everybody's at 100% cronyism, and Denmark is at 95, there's still cronyism. So, what is the qualitative or quantitative element of that statement?
Alex Kladitis: And that's… that's what we're talking about. We're not talking about who's the lowest, or who's better than… we can talk about who's better than the others.
Alex Kladitis: But the fact is, cronyism
Alex Kladitis: is there, no matter what the society. And I would… I would say, not just Denmark, looking at the way the Western governments, Western European governments are behaving at the moment, I don't think there's any of them that's clean, in any way, shape, or form, including Denmark, given how the position's taking at the moment in politics.
Alex Kladitis: just the way I'm looking at it. Sorry.
Mike Nelson: And… and I think… The other thing we want to know is how are those numbers changing?
Mike Nelson: I mean, are there countries that are getting better, or is everybody going downhill?
Mike Nelson: Into the cesspool of the swamp.
Alex Kladitis: Yep.
Jerry Michalski: Eric had posted some useful links earlier about Transparency International and a couple other organizations, and I think that the transparency,
Jerry Michalski: info about
Jerry Michalski: You know, the surveys of global transparency are still pretty credible and pretty good and useful guides.
Jerry Michalski: And you were about to jump in and say something, Eric, go ahead.
Erik Willekens: Yeah, I wanted… I didn't find a hand gesture symbol anywhere anymore. It's alright.
Jerry Michalski: Go to the heart if you're on a Mac.
Erik Willekens: Okay. So,
Erik Willekens: Indeed, those, I just want to say a bit of the whole picture that I sent in those few links, because it's just links.
Erik Willekens: So one part of it is Global Action Networks. That's a guy, Steve Wardell, he wrote about it, and he basically… his principle is you have to work with all different actors from the different worlds to solve a problem internationally. He gives the example of the diamond trade, where in order for the…
Erik Willekens: for the… it's like a slave trade, most of the history, and they started cooperating with the ones that sell diamonds in Antwerp, for instance, the… there's a big diamond sector, to then
Erik Willekens: creates… What is it, like, that, like… I don't find a word.
Mike Nelson: The trust mark.
Erik Willekens: Thanks.
Erik Willekens: Yeah, a trust mark, there's another word for it, but let's say a trust mark
Erik Willekens: And any diamond mine then can get it, that is not working with slaves anymore. And then they have to also decide, do we work then? How do we change those other that are still working with slaves? So they start… have to also start working with the ones that are still working with slave trade. So there's this in-between place as well.
Erik Willekens: I think Denmark is perceived as one of the better ones. It's still not free from corruption, but it's… it's a place to look at
Erik Willekens: And by,
Erik Willekens: what Transparency International does is it's looking all over the world, it's using indicators to see, like, who's…
Erik Willekens: who's… Doing what on which of the aspects of
Erik Willekens: Of transparency, what's in order, what's not, and they're… they're updating yearly a list of
Erik Willekens: are these, countries behaving in a transparent way or not? And then there's another one, which is circularized. They actually, in the whole value chain, it's very sensitive to share information, because once you're going to say,
Erik Willekens: Once you're sharing information about any part of your value chain that is not
Erik Willekens: paving according to ethical values. That's also not good on your shareholders, and it will create an immediate backlash on your
Erik Willekens: Well… on… on your… On your economy, on your business. So they do it
Erik Willekens: In a way that's secure, that's private.
Erik Willekens: So all the info… it becomes a way to show what's in a value system, what's ethical and what's not, to then be able to talk about it, because otherwise it keeps on being secretive, nobody shares it, so that's kind of a smart way to tackle that problem.
Erik Willekens: Is to look into the…
Erik Willekens: Like, it's a closed system where the people who are involved can actually start looking at the value chain and how to improve it.
Erik Willekens: I think that makes much more sense than just say, show every penny. That's… idealistically, that sounds good, but it's not practical at all. It's really not a realistic way in… for companies to evolve.
Erik Willekens: Oh, and that's also this point about the slave trade, like.
Erik Willekens: you have to start talking to the people who don't do it well to be able to change them, and work with the enemy, work with the bad guys to make them less bad guys. That's a principle we don't like. We don't like to make our hands dirty as idealists.
Erik Willekens: there's this other guy, Kahani, who says, like, yeah, there is power and heart, and they need to come together. Love and power.
Erik Willekens: You also need to be able to… Yeah, if you… if you're…
Erik Willekens: Wanting to deal with power and how to change it, you'll have to go into the places where it hurts.
Erik Willekens: That's another part.
Erik Willekens: there's more aspects, but that's what my mental alacrity allows for the moment. Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: I think you mean Adam Kahane, and…
Erik Willekens: Yes.
Jerry Michalski: And his book is Power and Love, A Theory and Practice of Social Change.
Erik Willekens: Yeah, and what they… yeah, and their… their consultancy agency, so both Steve Odell and Adam Kahnig are… have been in the same consultancy agency, I don't remember…
Erik Willekens: Rios partners.
Jerry Michalski: It's Rios Partners, which is now owned by Generon.
Erik Willekens: Yeah, well, probably Rios Partners also did some evil things, but they also have a lot of really deep multi-stakeholder processes that did make sense, and that did change things.
Erik Willekens: Adam Karani was involved also in the process of
Erik Willekens: of South Africa when they… yeah.
Erik Willekens: when they changed from an apartheid regime, which is kind of still there, but it's also kind of better. I mean, everything is gradual, I think, and changes when…
Jerry Michalski: Thank you, thank you for bringing all those things into our conversation. Really appreciate it, Eric.
Jerry Michalski: Alex, please.
Alex Kladitis: Thank you, Eric. Very interesting. The thought that came to my mind is that
Alex Kladitis: What you're describing is excellent, is happening, is changing the…
Alex Kladitis: let's put it… the influence part of crony capitalism, or cronyism, the influence part, because there's influence, but there's also criminality.
Alex Kladitis: And everything you described there, to me, helps with the influence part, and by no means, that's a great thing to do.
Alex Kladitis: But I would like to… what came to my mind is, yeah, that addresses the influence part.
Alex Kladitis: But the criminality is a big issue. There are criminals out there doing… making things happen.
Alex Kladitis: Right? And it influences politics, it influences policy and everything else. It's not just the…
Alex Kladitis: The… the elective… what are we gonna call it?
Alex Kladitis: the normal things.
Alex Kladitis: non-criminal things. There is criminalism in crony capitalism, so if you go to Russia.
Alex Kladitis: This criminalism there, in addition to crony capitalism.
Alex Kladitis: I would argue there's criminalism everywhere, but it's a bit easier to see it in Russia than it is to see it in the US, or Britain, or whatever it is that we are.
Alex Kladitis: You know, it's sort of…
Alex Kladitis: I could tell you things about corruption, but anyway, never mind. That's the point I was trying to make, is that there's probably more nuance, but I liked what you said, Eric, because it addresses the…
Alex Kladitis: The normal, safe, Version of cronyism.
Jerry Michalski: just to add, to build on what you're saying, Alex, there's also,
Jerry Michalski: A trend to legalize a lot of things that you would see as immoral or crony or whatever else, just by passing laws because you have enough power, that things that you would normally not have allowed to have happen are suddenly not illegal anymore.
Jerry Michalski: They're just not things you want to see happening. But that happens in regime after regime. Once you get capture, once you get regulatory capture, you can effectively, sort of whitewash what you're doing a lot.
Jerry Michalski: Eric, it looked like you were gonna… Jump in again?
Erik Willekens: Yeah, I'm still… I can't find this hand symbol still, but I'm the, not the one that puts up my hand, actually. Yeah. So…
Erik Willekens: Yeah, I just want to give it an example, like…
Erik Willekens: I live in The Hague. The Hague has the International Criminal Court and the Criminal Court of Justice.
Erik Willekens: The big problem is, like, on an international level, it's very difficult
Erik Willekens: for law to be effect, like, Netanyahu has been,
Erik Willekens: on the list of, like, you have to, like, bring him over to the International Criminal Court of Justice.
Erik Willekens: If he passes in your country, that doesn't happen.
Erik Willekens: But… and that's… that shows, like, how difficult it is for an international community.
Erik Willekens: to actually live according to laws on an international level. It does work a bit, but it also shows within how, like, how…
Erik Willekens: Our countries, they seem to be better because we're democracies, but then when push comes to shove, we actually also become a bit crony, even on that level.
Erik Willekens: And we are… I mean, The Hague for me is very hopeful in one way, because they actually do that. They actually put them up as a criminal. On the other hand.
Erik Willekens: I'm also very close to Rotterdam, which is one of the biggest drug trafficking hubs in the whole world, which is irony, like, it's everywhere, and it's kind of… and the Shell headquarters, like, right around the corner, so it's… it's all happening together so close to each other, which is kind of crazy.
Erik Willekens: this kind of lawfulness, lawlessness. It's… it's happening in the same place, at the same time, like, 500 meters from each other, and it's the absolute opposite.
Jerry Michalski: I mean, this is,
Jerry Michalski: This opens up so many interesting questions, because what you were just saying made me realize that I have a thought in my brain, Trump and Putin are acid tests of the world's legal systems.
Jerry Michalski: That, you know, if the legal systems can't stop people, and that's supposed to be the recourse within the system.
Jerry Michalski: Then what… what does?
Mike Nelson: Who said that?
Jerry Michalski: Pardon?
Mike Nelson: Who said that quote?
Jerry Michalski: That was me. That was just the way… that was a label I gave a thought in my brain, which I'll post into the chat now.
Mike Nelson: That's very wise. Very good. Very quotable and tweetable.
Jerry Michalski: Oh, good. Doug, you're muted, go ahead.
Doug Breitbart: Yeah, I just,
Doug Breitbart: I think there's a tendency to conflate legal system
Doug Breitbart: With a set of morality, ethics, and values.
Doug Breitbart: And they are not an equivalency.
Doug Breitbart: a legal system… If you look at the definition of… of law, it is a system…
Doug Breitbart: For… by which a… Society or state or other
Doug Breitbart: Defines a set of rules that apply to all
Doug Breitbart: And that defines the penalty when broken, breached, or violated.
Doug Breitbart: So the emphasis of… definitionally, the emphasis of law… what a law is.
Doug Breitbart: And what a legal system is, is it's a system that defines a set of rules and defines a set of penalties for violating them.
Doug Breitbart: There is no intrinsic thing that says a legal system has to be moral, ethical, fair, or righteous.
Doug Breitbart: So… to your statement, Jerry, I don't think…
Doug Breitbart: Trump and Putin test legal systems. Trump and Putin are just varieties of legal systems.
Doug Breitbart: They just happen to be totalitarian.
Doug Breitbart: authoritarian.
Doug Breitbart: Their law governs, and everybody else marches to the order or gets shot.
Doug Breitbart: The common law legal system, the…
Doug Breitbart: In, you know, quaint old institutions, legal institutional structures of
Doug Breitbart: you know, what used to be the United States of America.
Doug Breitbart: Purports to carry and bring values and service-tos and all sorts of plugins and add-ons and layers.
Doug Breitbart: But that's not… strictly, about the legal system. It's about, you know, in whose hand it's being wielded.
Doug Breitbart: And with that, I'm complete.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Doug.
Jerry Michalski: Partly what I meant was, when Trump was out of power in his interregnum, you know, post his first administration, he did not control any of the mechanisms of power. He had referent… he had amazing referent power within the Republican Party.
Jerry Michalski: That played out like crazy, played out just right for him.
Jerry Michalski: But
Jerry Michalski: there was a legal system that he did not control with a bunch of Trump-appointed judges who were ruling against him, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So I'm… Putin less so, because once Putin took control, he managed to, you know, weaken everything.
Jerry Michalski: And, and break institutions, a lot.
Jerry Michalski: And put his cronies in charge.
Jerry Michalski: But I'm… I'm between what Eric just said about the International Criminal Court, which I'm, you know, slightly aware of, how…
Jerry Michalski: how difficult and futile the work of actually bringing people to justice is worldwide. Worldwide. I think I mentioned here, Mark Goodman is a consultant on crime. He used to work at FBI, then he worked at Interpol, and he gave a talk at the Institute for the Future years ago, where he described how to communicate with one of his peers across the Atlantic.
Jerry Michalski: He had to go through channels, his message had to sort of work its way up, go across, work its way down, and then he said, and our enemies are just using email.
Jerry Michalski: They're just writing to each other, or signal, or whatever. I mean, like, you know, encrypted messaging, right? I don't we just write each other? And you could hear an audible gasp go through the audience.
Doug Breitbart: Everybody's like.
Jerry Michalski: wow, we're… we're really screwed. Like, if we're forcing… if we're forcing enforcers to go through channels and, you know, hindering their every effort to do stuff, wow! And, by the way, it's real easy to pass laws that cripple
Jerry Michalski: efforts to corral bad actors. And when bad actors get in… when you get capture, how do you avoid… I think… I think maybe this is one of my particular fascinations with this question about crony capitalism is, how do you detect, avoid, and then undo capture of systems?
Mike Nelson: Hmm.
Jerry Michalski: Gil, please.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yeah, I think that's a really important question, Jerry. The anti-corruption mechanisms that we've put in place over the decades came from good intent, but they get ossified.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: When I was CSO of Palo Alto, I couldn't talk to city council members outside of council meetings unless I had the explicit approval of the city manager.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Yep. And no more than two of them could talk together. If three of them talk together, it's a violation of some state law. So, you know, there's good intention and then difficult mechanisms and regulatory capture and all that, but I want to follow on what Doug said. I think what he said about laws.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: is extremely important. it, it, it raises the parallel system that we have in human cultures of norms.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And shaming as, as adjustment and control mechanisms, which of course have their own downside, because they can suppress variety and deviation and individual freedom and so forth.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: But the question I've been mulling as I've been driving is this, is that, I think we may have talked about this last week or the week before. When a lion brings down a gazelle.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: kills it, drags it back to its pride to eat. Is that crime?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Predation is part of the living world. Things eat other things, things kill other things. We have parasites. These are evolutionary processes that are adaptive.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: In certain ways, and they're constrained in certain ways, and is what we're talking about just that? An organism or an entity striving for advantage and benefit, which all organisms do.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And there are various countervailing forces, you know, biological in the case of the non-human living world.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Institutional and cultural in the case of the human living world. And this is a constant dance of coevolution, and any thought of ever ending it is folly.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And the question is, what dance moves do we make to have the dance be something that we like?
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: And I'm complete with that question, and… actually, I'm not complete. I'm in the thrall of that question.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Let's see where y'all go with it.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Gil.
Gil Friend • Sustainability OG • CxO Coach: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Where do we go? Why don't we go into silence for a moment? This… we've gone…
Jerry Michalski: very quickly through a lot of things, and we keep dragging large issues onto the conversation, which I… which I love, but I find a little overwhelming now and then. So let me go into silence, and I'll bring us back out in a little moment.
Jerry Michalski: Everybody take… Three long breaths.
Jerry Michalski: Just… Inhale, gently.
Jerry Michalski: Hold the breath at the top a tiny bit.
Jerry Michalski: Let it all out.
Jerry Michalski: Stop at the bottom for a little bit.
Jerry Michalski: Inhale again.
Jerry Michalski: Take it in.
Jerry Michalski: Hold it at the top.
Jerry Michalski: Let it out.
Jerry Michalski: Hold it at the bottom.
Jerry Michalski: One more. Inhale.
Jerry Michalski: Fill your lungs.
Jerry Michalski: Hold it.
Jerry Michalski: And then let it up, and let… Whatever was troubling you, go.
Jerry Michalski: with the air.
Jerry Michalski: Also, a public service announcement, which I will make
Jerry Michalski: More often than I do, which is never…
Jerry Michalski: I do post these recordings to YouTube, like, right away, so what we say in here does go openly into the world.
Jerry Michalski: Just so everybody knows the ground rules here. I don't… I don't…
Jerry Michalski: I don't have a preamble, there isn't a place where, you know, all those kinds of things are stated very often, so…
Jerry Michalski: I think it's useful to note that.
Mike Nelson: How many people watch a typical episode, and have you had any episodes get thousands of viewers?
Jerry Michalski: Oh, our viewership is massive. We get, like…
Doug Breitbart: 15 to 30.
Jerry Michalski: viewerships for some of the most popular episodes. I mean, we really, we're really going.
Mike Nelson: I just wanted to make that clear to people.
Jerry Michalski: And none of our episodes… none of our calls has gone viral that I know of, anyway.
Mike Nelson: Can I, can I ask…
Alex Kladitis: Can I ask the question, what makes a person, out of all the YouTube material, what makes a person specifically look for our recording?
Alex Kladitis: Wow, baby.
Mike Nelson: They missed it, and they heard it was good.
Jerry Michalski: I think there… I think there are people who have discovered our conversations unlike them. I know that one of my dojo mates, regularly, you know.
Jerry Michalski: browses our calls and will comment to me on the map about things we said, and it's like, oh, so-and-so did this and that. I'm like, oh, wow, dang.
Jerry Michalski: So I, you know, I think there are people who, enjoy.
Jerry Michalski: what it is we're doing, somehow. I like that. Eric, you were trying to say something a moment ago.
Erik Willekens: Yeah, there's… Yeah, how long did it take for a bug to get recognized? A scoundrel.
Erik Willekens: And,
Erik Willekens: he was a scoundrel, a bit. He was not an easy person. But on the other hand, I shared this thing about embracing the groundless… groundless ground, and this was a very deep…
Erik Willekens: exist… existential philosophical conversation I had with… and it's this artifact generated and clawed on
Erik Willekens: Hard to be with the fact that there is no…
Erik Willekens: no easy fundament of positivity to hold onto in life. There's always gonna be more negativity.
Erik Willekens: And that came up when you had this moment of silence.
Erik Willekens: So, I just wanted to hand… yeah, add that, like, we… we are…
Erik Willekens: We're living in a world with a groundless ground.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Eric.
Jerry Michalski: Pete, you gotta follow that.
Pete Kaminski: I cannot, improve on that, living in a world with a groundless ground.
Pete Kaminski: I wanted to come back to the YouTube viewership, YouTube channel viewership, and it's…
Pete Kaminski: It's… it's true that in the vast world of billions of people, there are going to be a dozen or two who see this recording.
Pete Kaminski: But I also wanted to point out, and I don't mean to scare anybody or anything like that, but I also want to point out that
Pete Kaminski: not counted in those views are the transcript getting offloaded to Gemini, and if Anthropic and OpenAR are clever, they'll also end up with that transcript.
Pete Kaminski: And then social network analysis will, keep the set of these people, talking about these topics, and you said this thing in… in public, basically, forever.
Pete Kaminski: So it's, it's an… I, I, I appreciate, Jerry, that you post these, these calls, in public,
Pete Kaminski: And I wanted to just make it clear that, counting YouTube viewers is not the, not the only ramification of where… where this ends up.
Jerry Michalski: Absolutely.
Doug Breitbart: Absolutely, thank you. Especially in the times we're living in.
Alex Kladitis: Yeah.
Alex Kladitis: I have to say, Gerry, that you're absolutely right, because
Alex Kladitis: you cannot imagine how uncomfortable it makes me when I finish a call, and then I say, I think, oh, I said this, and I was gone to the world, you know? It's like… because when I'm in the moment, I'm talking to you guys, I'm not talking to the world.
Alex Kladitis: if I was a politician, I'd be talking to the world, so I wouldn't say half the things I say. It's a bit of a…
Alex Kladitis: you know.
Alex Kladitis: It makes me deeply uncomfortable, personally. If I could find the same audience, but without the transmission to the world, I'd be a lot more comfortable.
Jerry Michalski: Totally get that.
Jerry Michalski: In, in days of old, when I got out of grad school, before I started my first job out of grad school, I had a brief consulting engagement in Buenos Aires, Argentina, for 7 weeks. So I went there and did some really cool work, and made some friends who told me stories about the dirty war, and
Jerry Michalski: the stories would go roughly like, you know, you'd be in a cafe with your buddies, and all of a sudden, somebody would say, hey, the federal police is here, and everybody would just, like, leap out the windows and race to get out of there. Like, you did not want to be corralled.
Jerry Michalski: And then, if they sort of caught people, they'd go to your home, they didn't necessarily need a search warrant and things like that, they'd go to your home, or they'd just pick up your address book.
Jerry Michalski: And they would ransack your home, and if there was anything lefty in your home, and the best musicians of that era are… joined the Communist Party as protest, and then were basically forced to emigrate out of Argentina and Chile and Brazil, so a lot of them ended up in France and became really brilliant musicians and came back later to triumph.
Jerry Michalski: But if you had a record by Mercedes Sosa or Caetano Veloso or something like that, you might be disappeared and pushed out of a helicopter over the river plate. That, you know, that was happening. But then they'd grab your… and I'm saying all this because then they'd grab your address book and lather, rinse, repeat.
Jerry Michalski: They would basically go through your private contact list in your address book. And our address books are now very, very public.
Jerry Michalski: In ways that are uncomfortable for anybody who thinks that we're heading toward those kinds of regimes.
Jerry Michalski: And that is a piece of modern reality, unfortunately.
Jerry Michalski: Doug.
Jerry Michalski: We seek wisdom in these troubling times, Doug. What do you have for us?
Doug Breitbart: Well, I was actually… I wanted to respond where you just went, but also to respond to where Alex went.
Doug Breitbart: with that discomfort thing, and I was… and my… my question is, what if…
Doug Breitbart: You existed in a space and place in terms of your own identity, your own Earth, your own values, your own consciousness.
Doug Breitbart: that,
Doug Breitbart: You had no… Self-consciousness fear.
Doug Breitbart: Or doubt attached to how you walked in the world, how you contributed to the world, and…
Doug Breitbart: what you said.
Doug Breitbart: what you do.
Doug Breitbart: And… I'm having a very rubber-meets-the-road moment around that question.
Doug Breitbart: with my partners in being in systems at this moment. So…
Doug Breitbart: One of my partners and I found ourselves deciding with a new, relatively new client.
Doug Breitbart: To, with a little bit of a pricey.
Doug Breitbart: To send a transcript of our last discussion about that client.
Doug Breitbart: Unedited.
Doug Breitbart: Unadulterated, unfiltered.
Doug Breitbart: Because both of us, at the end of it, looked at each other and said, There's nothing in there.
Doug Breitbart: That isn't 100% in alignment with our orientation, our values are being in service to.
Doug Breitbart: And…
Doug Breitbart: Our difference, because we're being in systems, the focus is on the being part, not on the systems part.
Doug Breitbart: What we're actually selling is exactly that.
Doug Breitbart: It's, you know, what's living for us in response to…
Doug Breitbart: In… in the moment of the conversation.
Doug Breitbart: And…
Doug Breitbart: In the context of the world we live in, in the context of the working world, in the context of the culture we're in.
Doug Breitbart: You know, the rule is nobody tells you your fly is down until after you zip it up.
Doug Breitbart: Nobody ever says what they're actually thinking. Nobody actually shares what they're feeling.
Doug Breitbart: Because that's dangerous and risky.
Doug Breitbart: And… And I'm just sharing this because there is an alternative.
Doug Breitbart: And consistent with that, I also…
Doug Breitbart: don't have… don't carry fear in these kinds of spaces. I've been online in Zoom rooms and recorded sessions. Some posted… a lot posted, most posted, a lot… some not.
Doug Breitbart: And… I'll stand by me.
Doug Breitbart: And I'll accept consequences if the world and culture and society I'm living in decides that
Doug Breitbart: it doesn't like me, I'll… I'll live with that too.
Doug Breitbart: So, anyway, I'm complete with that, but it's just… Yeah.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Zach.
Alex Kladitis: Thank you, thank you for that, Doug.
Alex Kladitis: there's a difference. When I listen to you.
Alex Kladitis: I hear wisdom. When I listen to me, I hear… I don't hear wisdom, I hear my thoughts. And my thoughts, from experience, my thoughts are not exactly standard. You know, I tend to…
Alex Kladitis: I've talked to a lot of people about it. I talk to left, I talk to right, you know, and, you know, have a lot of non-standard
Alex Kladitis: things. Anyway, but… sorry, Jerry, I was going to talk about that a bit more, but, we haven't… we've gone away from the crony thing, so do we want to go back there? And… so I don't have anything to say on that. I just wasn't going to say anything more.
Jerry Michalski: Why don't you, put your thoughts into the room right now, and then we'll take a little temperature reading about where we are on the crony topic.
Alex Kladitis: Okay. My, my, thank you, Doug, for that again, I'll say it.
Alex Kladitis: My… the back of my mind, the biggest fear is that a lot of the…
Alex Kladitis: analysis of what people are saying and what they believe in is being offloaded, ultimately, to AIs, but even before AIs came along, to… to systems.
Alex Kladitis: So my biggest fear is that my name, or your name, or Jerry's name, or whatever, appears in some list.
Alex Kladitis: Because there are keywords that were used.
Alex Kladitis: And then, you know what bureaucracy's like? Systems of bureaucracies and people. They don't know you or me. And then they'll say, oh, okay, here's… I'll press a button there, and here's under surveillance, or whatever.
Alex Kladitis: And then before long, something will go wrong. That's what…
Alex Kladitis: Worries me more, particularly now, because it's so impersonal and so…
Alex Kladitis: I've, I've, I hadn't told this group, but… Two or three times.
Alex Kladitis: Back in 2010 or something, my parents wired me some money.
Alex Kladitis: to Britain, right? From Greece to Britain.
Alex Kladitis: And… The money was lost.
Alex Kladitis: I would call my bank, no, nothing's happened. I would call their bank, yeah, we sent it.
Alex Kladitis: So, I actually have to…
Alex Kladitis: 4 weeks or something, I went to the bank, I kicked up Merry Hill, because they kept saying, we've got no record of the money arriving, and I was saying to them, but it's Barclays, it was Barclays. Barclays here, Barclays there. They say they sent it. You say not.
Alex Kladitis: Anyway, so I really misbehaved in verbal means, and it's the middle of London, it's the international banking, lots of wealthy people around, and you've got Alex.
Alex Kladitis: effing and blinding and accusing everybody of stealing his money or whatever. Anyway, so off I went.
Alex Kladitis: really upset.
Alex Kladitis: And literally, a quarter of a mile away, someone tapped me on the shoulder.
Alex Kladitis: And it was one of the employees.
Alex Kladitis: And they said I'll tell you something now, if you tell anybody else.
Alex Kladitis: So it's a few years now, so it doesn't matter.
Alex Kladitis: If you tell anybody else, I will go to jail.
Alex Kladitis: But your money's not lost.
Alex Kladitis: It's just that because it was over a certain amount, it's been flagged for analysis by the Secret Services for terrorist purposes.
Alex Kladitis: And he said, the problem is, they've got such a backlog at the moment, it's taking them 3 months to clear the line.
Alex Kladitis: So you will get your money.
Alex Kladitis: But… but just wait 3 months, literally, when they get through the queue.
Alex Kladitis: Right? True story, I'm not making it up.
Alex Kladitis: And hopefully nobody's gonna go back and jail the person that told me.
Alex Kladitis: The advantage he has, or she has, I actually don't remember the face or anything else in such a state. I actually don't remember what they look like.
Alex Kladitis: But, but… and guess what? Next time, It happened again.
Alex Kladitis: So my name must be on some list. Every time everybody sends me money from overseas, bang! Except now they'll clear the queue faster, perhaps. I don't know, who knows? But that's what scares me.
Jerry Michalski: Crazy stuff.
Jerry Michalski: Eric, you've found how to raise your hand. First, I want to thank you for that, congratulate you for that.
Jerry Michalski: The general applause.
Jerry Michalski: And then off to you.
Erik Willekens: I was talking to, someone work… About what?
Erik Willekens: It's partly what keeps me having trust that it won't go to the extremes in America.
Erik Willekens: That the biggest chances that
Erik Willekens: Somehow, it will keep on being intact is because there's a very strong, dissident voice still allowed and able.
Erik Willekens: And… The moment the, the dictator wins is when the voices of dissent go silent.
Erik Willekens: So, I do hear the true story, I mean, it… and I think it's a tension arc, like, there's a balance to be made, but I also want to name that it's… it's really important
Erik Willekens: Like, if you're starting to criticize yourself to,
Erik Willekens: To hold yourself back from speaking truth.
Erik Willekens: You're actually also installing a system Of not speaking up.
Erik Willekens: And I'm sorry for what happened to you as well. I mean, it seems to be a very nasty situation to be in.
Erik Willekens: And at the same time, maybe thank you, I don't know, for taking the risk of speaking up and being honest, and maybe it's not always the most handy thing to do, but there is something really positive also in it. Maybe that's what I want to say. It's maintaining
Erik Willekens: The dissident voices, which… Which makes or breaks.
Erik Willekens: the rule of law and the dictatorship can be installed or not on a permanent level. There's this one country in the Asian country? I don't remember which one exactly.
Erik Willekens: that actually overturned their dictator not that long ago, a few years ago, I think.
Erik Willekens: And that was also because that was a very strong civic sector that kept on being able to speak out loudly the dissident voice.
Mike Nelson: I think it was Thailand.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah.
Jerry Michalski: Sounds right.
Mike Nelson: And of course, there's the famous example of Marcos in the Philippines, and how people power can make a difference.
Jerry Michalski: Mike, the floor is yours.
Mike Nelson: I wanted to bring up the role of religion.
Mike Nelson: And… How that has utterly failed.
Mike Nelson: to stop crony capitalism and corruption. I mean, it's really quite extraordinary. Even the Catholic Church and the Church of the Vatican.
Mike Nelson: Just riddled with corruption, and not, you know, not little… $100,000…
Mike Nelson: Stolen checks, you know, and we're talking… you know.
Mike Nelson: hundreds of millions, perhaps more. And often it's just because one or two people
Mike Nelson: Win the trust of people who don't really want to deal with all the complexity of moving money.
Mike Nelson: And they know how to move money, and they move it where they want, and often can cover up their tracks for years.
Mike Nelson: I mean, the good news is…
Mike Nelson: Because we do have electronic records, and we have more and more tools to spot these anomalous transactions.
Mike Nelson: People are usually caught.
Mike Nelson: But it is, it is extraordinary that,
Mike Nelson: all this business about the Ten Commandments, and thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not lie.
Mike Nelson: it doesn't seem to affect people. Maybe we need a new religion, maybe we need to start something that is more pragmatic and…
Mike Nelson: is… is…
Mike Nelson: very much focused on norms for good behavior, and there's some of that. I mean, George Washington was
Mike Nelson: From a very early age, obsessed with books on morals.
Mike Nelson: And he lived it, and he, he really, he really did live it, and that's why so many people trusted him to…
Mike Nelson: Take leadership of the army, and then take leadership of the country.
Jerry Michalski: I offer you Fubarism, which is a placeholder religion that I have founded.
Jerry Michalski: I put the website up.
Jerry Michalski: The question on Fubarism, which I think is maybe a good question for a future OGM call, is, if you got to invent a religion, what would you put in it?
Mike Nelson: There is a religious… Church of Life, which was founded by two British comedians.
Mike Nelson: And, for about a year or two, it was the fastest growing religion in England.
Mike Nelson: What was funny was it was all focused on the social. It was about getting people to come in on a Tuesday night, and have a potluck and support each other, and the classes were not on biblical studies, it was on…
Mike Nelson: How do you do estate planning?
Jerry Michalski: I don't know how… I don't know if it's still growing, but…
Mike Nelson: Well, if you… if Fubarism gets off the… off the… off the, you know, gets… gets launch velocity, I… I will definitely…
Mike Nelson: submit a petition that you be the first saint canonized under the Fubar religion.
Jerry Michalski: Fabulous, thank you.
Alex Kladitis: What was that… was that religion life? Religion of life, did he say?
Mike Nelson: I think it was called Church of Life, let me, let me see…
Jerry Michalski: I'm not sure that's the name, because that's… I recognize the story, but that didn't get me to it yet, so if anybody wants.
Mike Nelson: Let me… I'll do a little… little background.
Jerry Michalski: Beautiful.
Jerry Michalski: Pete, please.
Pete Kaminski: It's funny, Mike, I like that, the first thing, I'm gonna bring in religion, and I'm like, oh, thank goodness, somebody's gonna save us. And then, of course, I… in a way, the big organized religion
Pete Kaminski: I don't know if I would even pluralize that, but the really big one.
Pete Kaminski: it's kind of the original crony, you know, crony commercialism thing. I mean, it's 2,000… well, thousand years of basically, you know, organizing and sapping
Pete Kaminski: people and… and conducting crony, operations. I… and… and Mike, to your point, I… you… you said in there somewhere.
Pete Kaminski: taking advantage of people who want more simplicity in their life, you know, saying, hey, I'll sell you some simplicity, and, you know, it only costs some tithing and, you know, supplication, and, you know, grease the wheels a little bit so that the big man is on your side. No, no problem.
Pete Kaminski: So, I think that's actually a trenchant observation about how we ended up with chronocapitalism, because certainly, you know, one or two of the big religions came first and set the stage for it.
Jerry Michalski: And you only need to go back and look at, like, let's just say the Borgia family and the papacy, or, I don't know, pick a couple other little points in history to go
Jerry Michalski: really deeply into crony somethingism.
Jerry Michalski: long ago. There's a time-honored tradition of this happening all over the place.
Jerry Michalski: Maybe non-crony systems are the exception to the rule.
Jerry Michalski: And cronyism just is the background radiation? .
Mike Nelson: Well, as I say, I think there's a spectrum between the 10% cut, the 90% cut, and the 100% cut.
Jerry Michalski: Yeah.
Jerry Michalski: Stacy, and then we've got 10 minutes left in the call, I'd love to take some time just
Jerry Michalski: Thinking about the topic and the call, and was it satisfying, unsatisfying.
Jerry Michalski: Et cetera, et cetera. Just, like, feedback on… on… This particular topic and process.
Jerry Michalski: Sunday assembly sounds, sounds right, Pete.
Jerry Michalski: Thank you.
Jerry Michalski: Stacy.
Stacey Druss: Well, I was really triggered when Mike brought up religion, because I think it's a huge piece of this in many ways. I talk to lots and lots of religious people.
Stacey Druss: And…
Stacey Druss: So I would throw out three things that I think are part of the problem. One, it's going back to what I was saying about the secrecy and the blackmail. A large number of people suppressing who they are sexually.
Stacey Druss: Keeping a whole separate life, keeping all those secrets there, having to act out against the same group of who they are is a very big piece.
Stacey Druss: Another piece of it is
Stacey Druss: a large number of people are convinced that they can do anything they want to do here on Earth, because on their deathbed, as long as they invoke the name of Christ, they are totally forgiven. Nothing else matters, they are totally forgiven.
Stacey Druss: And then the other part is the patriarchal piece.
Stacey Druss: So, I think it's all wrapped up there. I mean, and I have no problem with religion. I love… I love the ritual piece, I love the community piece, I just think there needs to be accountability and transparency.
Stacey Druss: And, yeah.
Stacey Druss: Over.
Jerry Michalski: Thanks, Stacey.
Jerry Michalski: Thoughts about the topic and the call?
Mike Nelson: I just want to say a big thank you, and I learned a lot about particular case studies, and
Mike Nelson: I guess I was reaffirmed in my conviction that more transparency is probably going to be the most important thing here.
Mike Nelson: And that a lot of our current approaches, like.
Mike Nelson: monitoring every credit card transaction that a city councilman has are not really the right answer. I mean, somehow you change the behavior, not try to…
Mike Nelson: Document the behavior, which… I mean, a smart thief will find a way around such things.
Jerry Michalski: I'm really interested in how healthy communities rein in these bad practices, sort of…
Mike Nelson: And I probably have completely naive ideas about that, but I'm…
Jerry Michalski: very… Interested in how we self-regulate together, and out the bad actors, and not… Banish them, but…
Jerry Michalski: Call them in.
Jerry Michalski: In some way. I really like, sort of, post… maybe there's a future OGM topic also about call-in culture, as opposed to call-out culture.
Jerry Michalski: Which is a lovely thing. There's a… I have a draft…
Mike Nelson: Is that trademarked?
Jerry Michalski: There's a woman, hold on.
Jerry Michalski: There's a woman… Who gave a really nice…
Jerry Michalski: TED talk about call-in culture. She, calling in Loretta Ross.
Jerry Michalski: Don't call people out, call them in. I'll post the YouTube link in the chat.
Jerry Michalski: It's really good.
Jerry Michalski: There you go.
Jerry Michalski: And next week is a check-in call, and since I sort of skipped last month's check-in call, let's actually do check-in this next Thursday.
Jerry Michalski: So, stay.
Mike Nelson: C, please.
Stacey Druss: That's exactly… Jerry, thank you. What you said is exactly what I raised my hand to say.
Stacey Druss: The whole idea with transparency, there also needs to be some way of redemption and forgiveness, to be able to, you know, get back on track.
Stacey Druss: I think of… what's his name, Michael… the one that used to be Mia Culpa. Michael, Trump's old lawyer.
Stacey Druss: Michael.
Jerry Michalski: Oh, God. Yes, what is his name?
Mike Nelson: Michael Cohen. Michael Cohen.
Stacey Druss: Right. Well…
Mike Nelson: Ty Cobb is doing the same thing now. That's another one of Trump's lawyers.
Stacey Druss: Or even, like, people who have, like, been, like, these big, whatchamacallit.
Stacey Druss: People who have stolen, or, you know, big-time criminals who then go back and give you security tips on what to do. Like, you still recognize that they did something wrong, but they have an expertise that you want to use. And so a lot of times, people will use their expertise
Stacey Druss: But they're not… there's no punishment involved, or there's no transparency involved. And what I'm speaking to… okay, let me back up a minute.
Stacey Druss: When I was talking earlier about people saying, well, you have to deal with bad people.
Stacey Druss: I was… part of it has to do with the fact of bad people often have good information.
Stacey Druss: And so, I think there needs to be a way to allow them to contribute
Stacey Druss: But they also… like, I think of somebody wearing a scarlet letter. Like, maybe they need to have a scarlet letter that they get to clean up as they go along.
Stacey Druss: So, I just wanted to… Talk about the redemption piece.
Jerry Michalski: Love that. Thanks, Stacy. I'm just noticing that I'm gonna have to wrap this call right at the half hour, because I have a different call that got booked right after this, but we still have 5 minutes.
Jerry Michalski: So, reflections.
Jerry Michalski: Thoughts?
Jerry Michalski: Particularly interested in how our.
Alex Kladitis: Okay.
Jerry Michalski: handles this. Go ahead, Alex.
Alex Kladitis: I just want to say I feel this is the…
Alex Kladitis: the best conversation we've had on a topic. I've personally learned a lot of different aspects of it. I really enjoyed it. Not that I don't enjoy the other ones, I think this was a lot of quality stuff coming out today.
Mike Nelson: You said best conversation on a topic.
Mike Nelson: It's any topic.
Alex Kladitis: Out of the ones I've participated in with you guys here.
Mike Nelson: Well, you made it so, Alex.
Alex Kladitis: I'm not sure.
Jerry Michalski: We're gonna have to Breitbartize your… your…
Jerry Michalski: Your thoughts coming back to you, so you don't think that when you talk, it's, like, just, like.
Jerry Michalski: stuff that doesn't, you know, matter. It's like, no, no, no, we… we love what you bring to the group as well.
Jerry Michalski: Eric.
Erik Willekens: I think I'll bring in a symbol. It's a bit of a touchy one, because I don't really want to go into the World Wide Web, but still…
Erik Willekens: I… because it matters so much. I know an NVC trainer. NVC is for compassion.
Erik Willekens: And I actually know more than one that have traits from… of narcissism.
Erik Willekens: or… or, like, what we call narcissism, because I think often it's a very… That's bad wording.
Erik Willekens: And because of that, I started researching how to be compassionate with all these kind of,
Erik Willekens: personality disorders, and all kind of dark, triad things, and there is quite a lot of approaches that deal with it in a more compassionate way. It's not a simple way.
Erik Willekens: It requires a very deep understanding of personal communication, of boundary setting.
Erik Willekens: But it's actually also really possible.
Erik Willekens: And very under-trained, so there is a way.
Jerry Michalski: Eric is a trained NVC facilitator, mediator, I think.
Jerry Michalski: And, NVC is the worst named, highly useful technique out there. It's just a miserable name.
Jerry Michalski: But what kind of… Eric, stop me if I'm getting this wrong, but what it involves is that usually there's two parties who are aggrieved somehow, and you're trying to mediate between them. You try to get each party to articulate what the other party is… is… said.
Erik Willekens: It's about feelings and needs, and, like, what do I really feel, and what do I actually need, instead of saying, this is what is wrong about…
Erik Willekens: you, I say, like, oh, but I really feel any. That's basically…
Jerry Michalski: Yes, but the little piece of jiu-jitsu magic that I'm trying to point to is.
Jerry Michalski: the act of paraphrasing what the other person said until they say, yes, that's what I said, and they accept that you're repeating back to them the thing they said.
Jerry Michalski: That little act softens brains on both sides. And it's like a tennis match where both sides have to do that, and I think that act of representing in your head and speaking out without agreeing to it, you're not agreeing that what they said was right, you're just
Jerry Michalski: paraphrasing what they said. I find that that's a magic trick. It's fabulous.
Erik Willekens: How's to make marriage?
Stacey Druss: Sorry, don't you think that's something that they could teach kids? I mean, to me… They do.
Stacey Druss: But that should be, like, basic. That should be, like…
Jerry Michalski: Elementary. School curriculums. There's a couple… there's a video I watched of first graders on their own, three kids went off to the side, and a little girl winds up being the NVC facilitator for two other kids who had a fight on the playground, and they work it out. Like, yeah.
Stacey Druss: And they teach their parents.
Mike Nelson: Can I pass the contract?
Stacey Druss: to somebody? Would anybody like to keep this call going? And I have…
Jerry Michalski: Should we wrap the call?
Mike Nelson: Yeah, we gotta go.
Jerry Michalski: Okay, let's… we've had a great call. Thank you very, very much, totally appreciate this.
Jerry Michalski: See you next week for our check-in call.